Assessing Semiregional Cerebral Oxygen Consumption (CMRO2) in Preterm Neonates: A Quantitative MRI Cohort Study With Exploratory Analysis of Respiratory Support
Developing a noninvasive method for measuring oxygen consumption at both
regional and whole-brain levels in preterm infants is crucial for assessing
brain development and neuronal injury in this vulnerable population. This study
presents a multi-modal MRI technique and analysis pipeline that produces
whole-brain semiregional maps—with the potential to be fully regional—which we
employ in a cohort study to investigate how the duration of various respiratory
supports in very preterm infants affects CBF and the cerebral metabolic rate of
oxygen (CMRO2). Infants (n = 19) born < 32 weeks gestational age were recruited
in the neonatal intensive care unit. Infants were scanned at term-equivalent
age using a 3 T MRI sequence comprising T1-weighted, T2-weighted, arterial spin
labeling (ASL), and SWI. Days on three different categories of respiratory
support, based on levels of invasiveness, were recorded. Using multiple linear
regression, CBF and CMRO2 were analyzed against days on: respiratory support,
days in room air, and the proportion of days on respiratory support; GA and PMA
were used as confounding factors. Average CBF and CMRO2 of cortical grey matter
was 14.3 ± 4.25 mL/100 g/min and 29.49 ± 29.49 μmol/100 g/min, respectively.
CMRO2 and CBF were positively correlated with days on noninvasive respiratory
support and negatively correlated with days in room air. Using our novel
method, CBF and CMRO2 values aligned closely with literature values. Our
exploratory findings suggest that the type of respiratory support may influence
cerebral oxygenation during the neonatal period in infants born very preterm,
with greater oxygen delivery and consumption associated with noninvasive
respiratory support. Our semiregional brain analysis further highlights that
different brain structures are impacted in distinct ways. This study presents a
novel multimodal MRI approach to measure cerebral blood flow (CBF) and oxygen
metabolism (CMRO2) in preterm infants. Exploratory findings suggest noninvasive
respiratory support is associated with higher CBF and CMRO2, highlighting its
potential impact on neonatal brain oxygenation and development.

Does the Brain’s E:I Balance Really Shape Long-Range Temporal Correlations? Lessons Learned from 3T MRI
A 3T multimodal MRI study of healthy adults (n=19; 10 female; 21.3 - 53.4
years) was performed to investigate the relationship between fMRI long-range
temporal correlations and excitatory/inhibitory balance. The study objective
was to determine if the Hurst exponent (H) — an estimate of the
self-correlation and signal complexity — of the blood-oxygen-level-dependent
signal is correlated with the excitatory-inhibitory (E:I) ratio. E:I has been
proposed to serve as a control parameter for brain criticality — the theory
that the brain operates near a critical point between order and disorder,
optimizing information processing and adaptability — which H is believed to be
a measure of. Thus, understanding if H and E:I are correlated would clarify
this relationship. Moreover, findings in this domain have implications for
neurological and neuropsychiatric conditions with disrupted E:I balance, such
as autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, and Alzheimer’s disease. From a
practical perspective, H is easier to accurately measure than E:I ratio at 3T
MRI. If H can serve as a proxy for E:I, it may serve as a more practical
clinical biomarker for this imbalance and for neuroscience research in general.
The study collected functional MRI and magnetic resonance spectroscopy data
during rest and movie-watching. H was found to increase with movie-watching
compared to rest, while E:I (glutamate/GABA) did not change between conditions.
H and E:I were not correlated during either movie-watching or rest. This study
represents the first attempt to investigate this connection in vivo in humans.
We conclude that, at 3T and with our particular methodologies, no association
was found. We end with lessons learned and suggestions for future research.

The application of magnetic susceptibility separation for measuring cerebral oxygenation in preterm neonates
Quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM), a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
modality sensitive to deoxyhemoglobin, is a promising method for measuring
cerebral oxygenation in human neonates. Paramagnetic sources, like
deoxyhemoglobin, however, can be obscured by diamagnetic sources such as water
and myelin. This study evaluated whether QSM images, or isolated paramagnetic
components, are more accurate for measuring oxygenation of cerebral veins of
preterm neonates, and explored oxygenation differences between the major
cerebral veins.
19 preterm neonates were scanned on at term equivalent age on a 3T MRI using a
   multi-echo susceptibility-weighted imaging sequence. Susceptibility values
   were calculated from QSM images to determine oxygen saturation (SvO2) in the
   superior sagittal sinus (SSS) and central cerebral veins (CCV). The
   paramagnetic components of QSM images were isolated, and SvO2 values were
   recalculated.
The mean SvO2 values from QSM were 72.4% (SD, 3.4%) for the SSS and 68.7% (SD,
3.5%) for the CCV. SvO2 values for paramagnetic components were 58.1% (SD,
7.3%) for the SSS and 57.7% (SD, 7.0%) for the CCV.
While paramagnetic component decomposition yielded SSS values closer to those
found in the literature, it increased variability. No significant oxygenation
differences were found between the SSS and CCV, contrasting with prior studies.
This study evaluated the use of QSM and its paramagnetic components to measure
cerebral oxygenation in neonates. By comparing susceptibility-derived oxygen
saturation (SvO2) in the superior sagittal sinus (SSS) and central cerebral
veins (CCV), it adds to the field of neonatal cerebral oxygenation measurement.
Decomposing QSM into paramagnetic components shows potential for improving SvO2
accuracy, particularly in the SSS, though variability remains a challenge. The
results suggest no significant oxygenation difference between the SSS and CCV,
contrasting with previous findings, indicating a need for further research on
neonatal venous oxygenation.

Long-range temporal correlation development in resting-state fMRI signal in preterm infants: scanned shortly after birth and at term-equivalent age
While the newborn’s brain is functionally organised early on—with similar
resting state networks as those of adults present at birth—these networks
continue to develop at different rates and in complex ways over time. While
most in vivo functional imaging studies examine the spatial characteristics of
resting state networks (RSNs), such as their size or the degree of
connectivity, the temporal characteristics of these networks are less well
characterised. We set out to examine the long-range temporal correlation (LRTC)
of the fMRI blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal using the Hurst exponent
in various RSNs in infants born very preterm shortly after birth (< 32 weeks
gestational age; n = 64) and again later at term equivalent age (TEA) (n = 69).
The Hurst exponent in grey matter and white matter was 0.69 at preterm age and
increased significantly to 0.80 at TEA, with a greater difference between the
tissues at TEA. The Hurst exponent in RSNs similarly was found to be
approximately 0.68 for most networks at preterm age but increased significantly
at different rates by TEA: 0.77 and 0.76 in the cerebellum and frontal networks
respectively, and 0.84 and 0.83 in the motor and visual networks respectively.
This pattern is partly consistent with findings from previous functional
connectivity fMRI studies that the general growth and maturation of RSNs occur
first and develop more quickly in sensory and motor networks, but later in
associative networks like frontal ones. Importantly, this is the first time
that this pattern has been shown in the LRTC of the fMRI BOLD signal itself, an
area of study that may provide greater insight into functional brain
development.

Temporal complexity of the BOLD-signal in preterm versus term infants
Preterm birth causes alterations in structural and functional cerebral
development that are not fully understood. Here, we investigate whether basic
characteristics of BOLD signal itself might differ across preterm, term
equivalent, and term infants. Anatomical, fMRI, and diffusion weighted imaging
data from 716 neonates born at 23–43 weeks gestational age were obtained from
the Developing Human Connectome Project. Hurst exponent (H; a measure of
temporal complexity of a time-series) was computed from the power spectral
density of the BOLD signal within 13 resting state networks. Using linear mixed
effects models to account for scan age and birth age, we found that H increased
with age, that earlier birth age contributed to lower H values, and that H
increased most in motor and sensory networks. We then tested for a relationship
between temporal complexity and structural development using H and DTI-based
estimates of myelination and found moderate but significant correlations. These
findings suggest that the temporal complexity of BOLD signal in neonates
relates to age and tracks with known developmental trajectories in the brain.
Elucidating how these signal-based differences might relate to maturing
hemodynamics in the preterm brain could yield new information about
neurophysiological vulnerabilities during this crucial developmental period.

Iron Deficiency and Sleep/Wake Behaviors: A Scoping Review of Clinical Practice Guidelines—How to Overcome the Current Conundrum?
Current evidence suggests that iron deficiency (ID) plays a key role in the
pathogenesis of conditions presenting with restlessness such as attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and restless legs syndrome (RLS). In
clinical practice, ID and iron supplementation are not routinely considered in
the diagnostic work-up and/or as a treatment option in such conditions.
Therefore, we conducted a scoping literature review of ID guidelines. Of the 58
guidelines included, only 9 included RLS, and 3 included ADHD. Ferritin was the
most frequently cited biomarker, though cutoff values varied between guidelines
and depending on additional factors such as age, sex, and comorbidities.
Recommendations surrounding measurable iron biomarkers and cutoff values varied
between guidelines; moreover, despite capturing the role of inflammation as a
concept, most guidelines often did not include recommendations for how to
assess this. This lack of harmonization on the interpretation of iron and
inflammation biomarkers raises questions about the applicability of current
guidelines in clinical practice. Further, the majority of ID guidelines in this
review did not include the ID-associated disorders, ADHD and RLS. As ID can be
associated with altered movement patterns, a novel consensus is needed for
investigating and interpreting iron status in the context of different clinical
phenotypes.

Changes in cortical grey matter volume with Cognitive Orientation to daily Occupational Performance intervention in children with developmental coordination disorder
Introduction: Cognitive Orientation to daily Occupational Performance (CO-OP)
is a cognitive-based, task-specific intervention recommended for children with
developmental coordination disorder (DCD). We recently showed structural and
functional brain changes after CO-OP, including increased cerebellar grey
matter. This study aimed to determine whether CO-OP intervention induced
changes in cortical grey matter volume in children with DCD, and if these
changes were associated with improvements in motor performance and movement
quality.
Methods: This study is part of a randomized waitlist-control trial
(ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT02597751). Children with DCD (N = 78) were
randomized to either a treatment or waitlist group and underwent three MRIs
over 6 months. The treatment group received intervention (once weekly for
10 weeks) between the first and second scan; the waitlist group received
intervention between the second and third scan. Cortical grey matter volume was
measured using voxel-based morphometry (VBM). Behavioral outcome measures
included the Performance Quality Rating Scale (PQRS) and Bruininks-Oseretsky
Test of Motor Proficiency-2 (BOT-2). Of the 78 children, 58 were excluded
(mostly due to insufficient data quality), leaving a final N = 20 for analyses.
Due to the small sample size, we combined both groups to examine treatment
effects. Cortical grey matter volume differences were assessed using a repeated
measures ANOVA, controlling for total intracranial volume. Regression analyses
examined the relationship of grey matter volume changes to BOT-2 (motor
performance) and PQRS (movement quality).
Results: After CO-OP, children had significantly decreased grey matter in the
right superior frontal gyrus and middle/posterior cingulate gyri. We found no
significant associations of grey matter volume changes with PQRS or BOT-2
scores.
Conclusion: Decreased cortical grey matter volume generally reflects greater
brain maturity. Decreases in grey matter volume after CO-OP intervention were
in regions associated with self-regulation and motor control, consistent with
our other studies. Decreased grey matter volume may be due to focal increases
in synaptic pruning, perhaps as a result of strengthening networks in the brain
via the repeated learning and actions in therapy. Findings from this study add
to the growing body of literature demonstrating positive neuroplastic changes
in the brain after CO-OP intervention.

Cortical grey matter volume differences in children with developmental coordination disorder compared to typically developing children
Introduction: The cause of Developmental Coordination Disorder (DCD) is
unknown, but neuroimaging evidence suggests that DCD may be related to altered
brain development. Children with DCD show less structural and functional
connectivity compared to typically developing (TD) children, but few studies
have examined cortical volume in children with DCD. The purpose of this study
was to investigate cortical grey matter volume using voxel-based morphometry
(VBM) in children with DCD compared to TD children. Methods: This
cross-sectional study was part of a larger randomized-controlled trial
(ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT02597751) that involved various MRI scans of
children with/without DCD. This paper focuses on the anatomical scans,
performing VBM of cortical grey matter volume in 30 children with DCD and 12 TD
children. Preprocessing and VBM data analysis were conducted using the
Computational Anatomy Tool Box-12 and a study-specific brain template.
Differences between DCD and TD groups were assessed using a one-way ANOVA,
controlling for total intracranial volume. Regression analyses examined if
motor and/or attentional difficulties predicted grey matter volume. We used
threshold-free cluster enhancement (5,000 permutations) and set an alpha level
of 0.05. Due to the small sample size, we did not correct for multiple
comparisons. Results: Compared to the TD group, children with DCD had
significantly greater grey matter in the left superior frontal gyrus. Lower
motor scores (meaning greater impairment) were related to greater grey matter
volume in left superior frontal gyrus, frontal pole, and right middle frontal
gyrus. Greater grey matter volume was also significantly correlated with higher
scores on the Conners 3 ADHD Index in the left superior frontal gyrus, superior
parietal lobe, and precuneus. These results indicate that greater grey matter
volume in these regions is associated with poorer motor and attentional skills.
Discussion: Greater grey matter volume in the left superior frontal gyrus in
children with DCD may be a result of delayed or absent healthy cortical
thinning, potentially due to altered synaptic pruning as seen in other
neurodevelopmental disorders. These findings provide further support for the
hypothesis that DCD is related to altered brain development.

Cerebrovascular Reactivity Following Spinal Cord Injury
Spinal cord injuries (SCI) often result in cardiovascular issues, increasing
the risk of stroke and cognitive deficits. This study assessed cerebrovascular
reactivity (CVR) using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during a
hypercapnic challenge in SCI participants compared to noninjured controls.
Fourteen participants were analyzed (n = 8 with SCI [unless otherwise noted],
median age = 44 years; n = 6 controls, median age = 33 years). CVR was
calculated through fMRI signal changes. The results showed a longer CVR
component (tau) in the grey matter of SCI participants (n = 7) compared to
controls (median difference = 3.0 s; p < .05). Time since injury (TSI)
correlated negatively with steady-state CVR in the grey matter and brainstem of
SCI participants (RS = −0.81, p = .014; RS = −0.84, p = .009, respectively).
Lower steady-state CVR in the brainstem of the SCI group (n = 7) correlated
with lower diastolic blood pressure (RS = 0.76, p = .046). Higher frequency of
hypotensive episodes (n = 7) was linked to lower CVR outcomes in the grey
matter (RS = −0.86, p = .014) and brainstem (RS = −0.89, p = .007). Preliminary
findings suggest a difference in the dynamic CVR component, tau, between the
SCI and noninjured control groups, potentially explaining the higher
cerebrovascular health burden in SCI individuals. Exploratory associations
indicate that longer TSI, lower diastolic blood pressure, and more hypotensive
episodes may lead to poorer CVR outcomes. However, further research is
necessary to establish causality and support these observations.

The Effects of Wearing a 3‐Ply or KN95 Face Mask on Cerebral Blood Flow and Oxygenation
The SARS-CoV-2 virus has impacted life in many ways, one change being the use
of face masks. Their effect on MRI-based measurements of cerebral oxygen levels
with quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) and cerebral blood flow (CBF) is
not known. This study investigated whether wearing a face mask leads to changes
in CBF and cerebral venous oxygen saturation measured with MRI.
Repeated-measures cohort study. A total of 16 healthy volunteers (eight male,
eight female; 22–36 years) were recruited for the 3-ply study. Ten of the 16
participants (five male, five female; 23–36 years) took part in the KN95 study.
A 3 T, single-delay 3D gradient-and spin-echo pseudo-continuous arterial spin
labeling (pCASL) scan for CBF quantification, and gradient-echo for QSM and
oxygenation quantification. Gray matter CBF and magnetic susceptibility were
assessed by masking the pCASL CBF map and the QSM map to the T1-weighted gray
matter tissue segmentation. Venous oxygenation was determined from venous
segmentation of QSM maximum intensity projections. Paired Student's t-tests and
Cohen's d effect sizes were used to compare the face mask and no face mask
scans for gray matter CBF, gray matter magnetic susceptibility, and cerebral
venous oxygen saturation. Standard t-tests were used to assess whether the
order of scanning with and without a mask had any impact. A statistical cut off
of P < 0.05 was used. The 3-ply masks increased gray matter CBF from an average
of 43.99 mL/(100 g*min) to 46.81 mL/(100 g*min). There were no significant
changes in gray matter magnetic susceptibility (P = 0.07), or cerebral venous
oxygen saturation (P = 0.36) for the 3-ply data set. The KN95 masks data set
showed no statistically significant changes in gray matter CBF (P = 0.52) and
magnetic susceptibility (P = 0.97), or cerebral venous oxygen saturation (P =
0.93). The changes in blood flow and oxygenation due to face masks are small.
Only CBF increased significantly due to wearing a 3-ply mask.

Orientation dependence of R2 relaxation in the newborn brain
In MRI the transverse relaxation rate, R2 = 1/T2, shows dependence on the
orientation of ordered tissue relative to the main magnetic field. In previous
studies, orientation effects of R2 relaxation in the mature brain's white
matter have been found to be described by a susceptibility-based model of
diffusion through local magnetic field inhomogeneities created by the
diamagnetic myelin sheaths. Orientation effects in human newborn white matter
have not yet been investigated. The newborn brain is known to contain very
little myelin and is therefore expected to exhibit a decrease in orientation
dependence driven by susceptibility-based effects. We measured R2 orientation
dependence in the white matter of human newborns. R2 data were acquired with a
3D Gradient and Spin Echo (GRASE) sequence and fiber orientation was mapped
with diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). We found orientation dependence in newborn
white matter that is not consistent with the susceptibility-based model and is
best described by a model of residual dipolar coupling. In the near absence of
myelin in the newborn brain, these findings suggest the presence of residual
dipolar coupling between rotationally restricted water molecules. This has
important implications for quantitative imaging methods such as myelin water
imaging, and suggests orientation dependence of R2 as a potential marker in
early brain development.

Monofractal analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging: An introductory review
The following review will aid readers in providing an overview of scale-free
dynamics and monofractal analysis, as well as its applications and potential in
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) neuroscience and clinical
research. Like natural phenomena such as the growth of a tree or crashing ocean
waves, the brain expresses scale-invariant, or fractal, patterns in neural
signals that can be measured. While neural phenomena may represent both
monofractal and multifractal processes and can be quantified with many
different interrelated parameters, this review will focus on monofractal
analysis using the Hurst exponent (H). Monofractal analysis of fMRI data is an
advanced analysis technique that measures the complexity of brain signaling by
quantifying its degree of scale-invariance. As such, the H value of the blood
oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal specifies how the degree of
correlation in the signal may mediate brain functions. This review presents a
brief overview of the theory of fMRI monofractal analysis followed by notable
findings in the field. Through highlighting the advantages and challenges of
the technique, the article provides insight into how to best conduct fMRI
fractal analysis and properly interpret the findings with physiological
relevance. Furthermore, we identify the future directions necessary for its
progression towards impactful functional neuroscience discoveries and
widespread clinical use. Ultimately, this presenting review aims to build a
foundation of knowledge among readers to facilitate greater understanding,
discussion, and use of this unique yet powerful imaging analysis technique.

Fractal-based analysis of fMRI BOLD signal during naturalistic viewing conditions
Background: Temporal fractals are characterized by prominent scale-invariance
and self-similarity across time scales. Monofractal analysis quantifies this
scaling behavior in a single parameter, the Hurst exponent (H). Higher H
reflects greater correlation in the signal structure, which is taken as being
more fractal. Previous fMRI studies have observed lower H during conventional
tasks relative to resting state conditions, and shown that H is negatively
correlated with task difficulty and novelty. To date, no study has investigated
the fractal dynamics of BOLD signal during naturalistic conditions. Methods: We
performed fractal analysis on Human Connectome Project 7T fMRI data (n = 72, 41
females, mean age 29.46 ± 3.76 years) to compare H across movie-watching and
rest. Results: In contrast to previous work using conventional tasks, we found
higher H values for movie relative to rest (mean difference = 0.014; p = 5.279
× 10−7; 95% CI [0.009, 0.019]). H was significantly higher in movie than rest
in the visual, somatomotor and dorsal attention networks, but was significantly
lower during movie in the frontoparietal and default networks. We found no
cross-condition differences in test-retest reliability of H. Finally, we found
that H of movie-derived stimulus properties (e.g., luminance changes) were
fractal whereas H of head motion estimates were non-fractal. Conclusions:
Overall, our findings suggest that movie-watching induces fractal signal
dynamics. In line with recent work characterizing connectivity-based brain
state dynamics during movie-watching, we speculate that these fractal dynamics
reflect the configuring and reconfiguring of brain states that occurs during
naturalistic processing, and are markedly different than dynamics observed
during conventional tasks. Highlights - Fractal analysis of fMRI data reveals
differences in temporal signal dynamics between movie-watching and resting
state conditions. Movie vs. rest differences in fractal dynamics emerge at both
the whole-brain level and by resting state networks. The Hurst exponent has
moderate-strong test-retest reliability in both conditions.

Quantitative Susceptibility Mapping of Venous Vessels in Neonates with Perinatal Asphyxia
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Cerebral venous oxygen saturation can be used as an
indirect measure of brain health, yet it often requires either an invasive
procedure or a noninvasive technique with poor sensitivity. We aimed to test
whether cerebral venous oxygen saturation could be measured using quantitative
susceptibility mapping, an MR imaging technique, in 3 distinct groups: healthy
term neonates, injured term neonates, and preterm neonates. MATERIALS AND
METHODS: We acquired multiecho gradient-echo MR imaging data in 16 neonates
with perinatal asphyxia and moderate or severe hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
(8 term age: average, 40.0 [SD, 0.8]  weeks’ gestational age; 8 preterm, 33.5
[SD, 2.0]  weeks’ gestational age) and in 8 healthy term-age controls (39.3
[SD, 0.6] weeks, for a total of n = 24. Data were postprocessed as quantitative
susceptibility mapping images, and magnetic susceptibility was measured in
cerebral veins by thesholding out 99.95% of lower magnetic susceptibility
values. RESULTS: The mean magnetic susceptibility value of the cerebral veins
was found to be 0.36 (SD, 0.04) ppm in healthy term neonates, 0.36 (SD,
0.06) ppm in term injured neonates, and 0.29 (SD, 0.04) ppm in preterm injured
neonates. Correspondingly, the derived cerebral venous oxygen saturation values
were 73.6% (SD, 2.8%), 71.5% (SD, 7.4%), and 72.2% (SD, 5.9%). There was no
statistically significant difference in cerebral venous oxygen saturation among
the 3 groups (P = .751). CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative susceptibility
mapping–derived oxygen saturation values in preterm and term neonates agreed
well with values in past literature. Cerebral venous oxygen saturation in
preterm and term neonates with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, however, was
not found to be significantly different between neonates or healthy controls.

Myelin water imaging and R2* mapping in neonates: Investigating R2* dependence on myelin and fibre orientation in whole brain white matter
R2* relaxation provides a semiquantitative method of detecting myelin, iron and
white matter fibre orientation angles. Compared with standard histogram-based
analyses, angle-resolved analysis of R2* has previously been shown to
substantially improve the detection of subtle differences in the brain between
healthy siblings of subjects with multiple sclerosis and unrelated healthy
controls. Neonates, who are born with very little myelin and iron, and an
underdeveloped connectome, provide researchers with an opportunity to
investigate whether R2* is intimately linked with fibre-angle or myelin content
as it is in adults, which may in future studies be explored as a potential
white matter developmental biomarker. Five healthy adult volunteers (mean age
[±SD] = 31.2 [±8.3] years; three males) were recruited from Vancouver, Canada.
Eight term neonates (mean age = 38.6 ± 1.2 weeks; five males) were recruited
from the Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University neonatal ward. All
subjects were scanned on identical 3 T Philips Achieva scanners equipped with
an eight-channel SENSE head coil and underwent a multiecho gradient echo scan,
a 32-direction DTI scan and a myelin water imaging scan. For both neonates and
adults, bin-averaged R2* variation across the brain's white matter was found to
be best explained by fibre orientation. For adults, this represented a
difference in R2* values of 3.5 Hz from parallel to perpendicular fibres with
respect to the main magnetic field. In neonates, the fibre orientation
dependency displayed a cosine wave shape, with a small R2* range of 0.4 Hz.
This minor relationship in neonates provides further evidence for the key role
myelin probably plays in creating this fibre orientation dependence later in
life, but suggests limited clinical application in newborn populations. Future
studies should investigate fibre-orientation dependency in infants in the first
5 years, when substantial myelin development occurs.

Quantitative Analysis of Punctate White Matter Lesions in Neonates Using Quantitative Susceptibility Mapping and R2* Relaxation
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: It is difficult to distinguish punctate white matter
lesions from focal hemorrhagic lesions in neonates on conventional MR imaging
because both kinds of lesions show increased signal intensity on T1-weighted
images and, frequently, decreased signal intensity on T2-weighted images. Our
aim was to distinguish punctate white matter lesions and focal hemorrhagic
lesions using quantitative measures. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the current
study, we acquired multiecho gradient recalled-echo MR imaging data from 24
neonates with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy and postprocessed them as R2*
relaxation maps and quantitative susceptibility maps. Seven subjects who were
found to have multifocal punctate white matter lesions and/or focal hemorrhagic
lesions on R2* maps were included (mean gestational age at birth, 33 ± 4.28
weeks; mean gestational age at scanning, 38 ± 2 weeks). Manually drawing ROIs
on R2* maps, we measured R2* and magnetic susceptibility values of the lesions,
along with white matter regions within the corpus callosum as healthy
comparison tissue. RESULTS: R2* and magnetic susceptibility values were both
found to easily distinguish punctate white matter lesions, focal hemorrhagic
lesions, and healthy white matter tissue from each other (P < .05), with a
large Hedge g. R2* and magnetic susceptibility values were significantly
increased in focal hemorrhagic lesions compared with punctate white matter
lesions and healthy white matter tissue. Punctate white matter lesions were
also found to have significantly increased values over healthy white matter
tissue. CONCLUSIONS: R2* and quantitative susceptibility maps can be used to
help clinicians distinguish and measure focal hemorrhages, punctate white
matter lesions, and healthy white matter tissue.

Pathological Insights From Quantitative Susceptibility Mapping and Diffusion Tensor Imaging in Ice Hockey Players Pre and Post-concussion
Myelin sensitive MRI techniques, such as diffusion tensor imaging and myelin
water imaging, have previously been used to reveal changes in myelin after
sports-related concussions. What is not clear from these studies, however, is
how myelin is affected: whether it becomes degraded and possibly removed, or
whether the myelin sheath loosens and becomes “decompacted”. Previously, our
team revealed myelin specific changes in ice hockey players 2 weeks
post-concussion using myelin water imaging. In that study, 45 subjects
underwent a pre-season baseline scan, 11 of which sustained a concussion during
play and received follow-up scans: eight were scanned within 3 days, 10 were
scanned at 14 days, and nine were scanned at 60 days. In the current
retrospective analysis, we used quantitative susceptibility mapping, along with
the diffusion tensor imaging measures axial diffusivity and radial diffusivity,
to investigate this myelin disruption. If sports-related concussive hits lead
to myelin fragmentation in regions of lowered MWF, this should result in a
measurable increase in magnetic susceptibility, due to the anisotropic myelin
fragmenting into isotropic myelin debris, and the diamagnetic myelin tissue
being removed, while no such changes should be expected if the myelin sheath
simply loosens and becomes decompacted. An increase in radial diffusivity would
likewise reveal myelin fragmentation, as myelin sheaths block water diffusion
out of the axon, with little to no changes expected for myelin sheath
loosening. Statistical analysis of the same voxels-of-interest that were found
to have reduced myelin water fraction 2 weeks post-concussion, revealed no
statistically significant changes in magnetic susceptibility, axial
diffusivity, or radial diffusivity at any time-point post-concussion. This
suggests that myelin water fraction changes are likely due to a loosening of
the myelin sheath structure, as opposed to fragmentation and removal of myelin
debris.

Imaging the role of myelin in concussion
Myelin, the fatty substance that surrounds, protects, and electrically
insulates axons in the central nervous system, is thought to play an important
role in the pathophysiology of mild traumatic brain injuries (mTBIs). White
matter tracts (both myelinated and nonmyelinated axons) are vulnerable to
damage from the impact-acceleration forces sustained in a traumatic brain
injury (TBI), with evidence indicating that nonmyelinated axons are more
vulnerable than myelinated ones. Further evidence suggests that damage to
either the axon or myelin sheath alone can lead to damage to the other. This
damage occurs from diffuse shear strains caused by linear and rotational
acceleration of the brain during blast impacts. As opposed to more severe TBI,
in which complete axon severance is observed following high-magnitude impacts,
it is thought that axonal and myelin disorder in mTBI takes days to weeks to
develop. After primary axonal shearing and stretching, and possible blood
capillary ruptures, a cascade of secondary mechanisms takes place through
biochemical, metabolic, and cellular changes. Briefly, these changes include an
increased sodium influx, which results in a continuously working
sodium-potassium pump to restore the resting state of the neurons. More energy
in the form of adenosine triphosphate is required and this is measurable
through an increased blood flow. During the acute stage of mTBI, around 48
hours, the brain first experiences this increased blood flow and is able to
compensate for the high energy demand. However, shortly afterward, over the
subsequent 24 hours, the cerebral perfusion becomes diminished, leading to an
insufficient energy supply. This reduction in global and regional blood flow
has been linked to recovery duration, with some work suggesting a subsequent
oxidative stress accumulation that results in suppression of the
differentiation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells to oligodendrocytes, as well
as myelin renewal. This process in turn is expected to lead to a loss of
oligodendrocytes and demyelination of the axons. A second injury during this
vulnerable period of reduced blood flow can result in even more serious
injuries. Along with the ionic flux, indiscriminate glutamate release occurs,
leading to mitochondrial dysfunction and calcium sequestration, further
exasperating the energy crisis and causing cytoskeletal damage. Damage to the
myelin and oligodendrocytes can occur through this calcium overload in the
cytoplasm. Swelling of the axon caused by impaired transport can lead to axonal
disconnection and wallerian degeneration (anterograde degeneration). These
observations have been seen in histopathology specimens, showing axonal bulbs,
irregular tortuous axonal swellings, and small sections of degraded myelin
sheaths

